Conditional rendering in React refers to the ability to show or hide certain components or UI elements based on specific conditions. It allows for dynamic and interactive web applications by altering the rendering of different parts of the UI based on the current state or values in the application.

The problem that conditional rendering solves is the need to display different UI elements or components based on varying situations. In many cases, the UI needs to adapt and change depending on user input, network responses, or other application logic. Without conditional rendering, developers would have to manually manage the visibility of components, resulting in complex and error-prone code.

One common example of conditional rendering is displaying different UI elements based on user authentication. For instance, if a user is logged in, we might want to show a "Logout" button, whereas if the user is not logged in, we might want to display a "Login" button instead.

To illustrate conditional rendering, let's consider a simple React component that displays a greeting message based on the time of the day. If it's morning, the component should display "Good Morning!" but if it's evening, it should display "Good Evening!". Below is an example of how we can achieve this using conditional rendering in React:

```jsx
import React from 'react';

class GreetingMessage extends React.Component {
  constructor(props) {
    super(props);
    this.state = {
      currentTime: new Date(),
    };
  }

  componentDidMount() {
    this.timer = setInterval(() => {
      this.setState({ currentTime: new Date() });
    }, 1000);
  }

  componentWillUnmount() {
    clearInterval(this.timer);
  }

  render() {
    const { currentTime } = this.state;
    const currentHour = currentTime.getHours();
    let greeting;

    if (currentHour < 12) {
      greeting = 'Good Morning!';
    } else {
      greeting = 'Good Evening!';
    }

    return (
      <div>
        <h1>{greeting}</h1>
      </div>
    );
  }
}

export default GreetingMessage;
```

In the example above, we have a class component called `GreetingMessage` that initializes the `currentTime` state with the current time. The `componentDidMount` method sets up a timer that updates the `currentTime` state every second. The `componentWillUnmount` method clears the timer when the component is unmounted.

Inside the `render` method, we access the current hour of the day from the `currentTime` state. Based on this value, we conditionally assign a greeting message to the `greeting` variable. If the current hour is less than 12, it's considered morning, and the greeting is set to "Good Morning!". Otherwise, if the hour is 12 or greater, it's considered evening, and the greeting is set to "Good Evening!".

Finally, we render the greeting message inside an `h1` element. The greeting message will update and re-render every second, displaying either "Good Morning!" or "Good Evening!" based on the current time.

This example demonstrates how conditional rendering can be used to adapt the UI based on changing conditions. By leveraging conditional rendering in React, we can build responsive and interactive applications that provide a tailored user experience.